SQLAlchemy list filtering example for documentation (#537)
osohq/oso: docs/getting-started/list-filtering/sqlalchemy.rst

==================
SQLAlchemy Adaptor
==================

The ``sqlalchemy_oso`` library can enforce policies over SQLAlchemy models.
This allows policies to enforce access to collections of objects without
needing to authorize each object individually.

Usage
=====

.. todo:: (dhatch) More precise terminology (declarative models, etc.) in this
   section.

The ``sqlalchemy_oso`` library works over your existing SQLAlchemy ORM models
without modification.  To get started, we write a policy over our model types.

> :py:func:`sqlalchemy.auth.register_models` can be used to register all models

Author: Good idea.

that descend from a declarative base class with oso as types that are available

> in the policy.

Author: yes.

> in the policy.

Author: It is -- your suggestion is good but honestly otherwise I'm not sure I can shorten it much.

> in the policy.

Author: The tricky bit is there isn't actually a model base class with SQLAlchemy.  You dynamically create the base class using `declarative_base()`.

> Then, use the :py:func:`sqlalchemy.hooks.authorized_sessionmaker` session

Author: session factory is a term used throughout the SQLAlchemy documentation.

factory instead of the default SQLAlchemy ``sessionmaker``. Every query made
using sessions from this factory will have authorization applied.

Before executing a query, oso consults the policy and obtains a list of
conditions that must be met for an object to be authorized.  These conditions

> are translated into SQLAlchemy expressions and added to the query before

Author: Why?

> are translated into SQLAlchemy expressions and added to the query before

Reviewer: Prefer how it implies a filtering (reducing) operation instead of an additive operation, but it's not a big deal

> are translated into SQLAlchemy expressions and added to the query before

Author: I see. That makes sense

retrieving objects from the database.

Example
=======

Let's look at an example usage of this library.  Our example is a social media
app that allows users to create posts.  There is a ``Post`` model and a ``User``
model:

.. literalinclude:: /examples/list-filtering/sqlalchemy/sqlalchemy_example/models.py
    :caption: :fab:`python` models.py
    :language: python

Now, we'll write a policy over these models.  Our policy contains the following
rules:

1. A user can read any public post.
2. A user can read their own private posts.
3. A user can read private posts for users they manage (defined through the

>    ``user.manages`` relationship).

Author: I agree, but I don't want to change the example a ton right now.  Could we do this as follow up?

>    ``user.manages`` relationship).

Reviewer: yes

> 4. A user can read all other users.

Author: Added a note on why this is important to the docs page

.. literalinclude:: /examples/list-filtering/sqlalchemy/sqlalchemy_example/policy.polar
    :caption: :fa:`oso` policy.polar
    :language: polar

Note that these rules are written over single model objects.

.. todo:: Formatting is unfortunate but continuing...

Let's test out the policy in a REPL:

> .. mdinclude:: ../../examples/list-filtering/sqlalchemy/example.md

Author: I made the formatting much better and cut it down. LMK what you think on length now.

How oso authorizes SQLAlchemy Data
==================================

As you can see from the above example, the SQLAlchemy oso integration allows
regular SQLAlchemy queries to be executed with authorization applied.

To accomplish this, oso has a custom query class that applies authorization
filters based on the loaded policy before the query is executed.

Before compiling a SQLAlchemy query, the entities in the query are authorized
with oso.  oso returns authorization decisions for each entity that indicate
what constraints must be met for the entity to be authorized.  These constraints
are then translated into filters on the SQLAlchemy query object.

For example, our above policy has the following code:

.. code-block:: polar

    allow(user: User, "read", post: Post) if
        post.access_level = "private" and post.created_by = user;

The oso library converts the constraints on Post expressed in this policy into a
SQLAlchemy query like::

    session.query(Post)
        .filter(Post.access_level == "private" & Post.created_by == user)

> This translation makes the policy an effective abstraction for expressing
> policies that must be enforced over objects stored in a database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This translation makes the policy an effective abstraction for expressing
authorization logic over collections.
```

Limitations
===========

> This feature is still under active development. Most unsupported policies will
> cause a runtime error rather than incorrect authorization behavior. More

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature is still under active development. Not all policies that work in a non-partial setting will currently work with partials. Most unsupported policies will
cause a runtime error rather than incorrect authorization behavior. More
```

policies will be supported as we continue working on this feature.  The
SQLAlchemy adaptor is ready for evaluation and testing. However, we recommending
getting in touch with us before using it in production.  Join our Slack_.

There are some operators and features of Polar that do not currently work with
the SQLAlchemy Library when used **anywhere in the policy**:

- the ``cut`` operator
- rules that rely on ordered execution based on class inheritance

> - negated queries using the ``not`` operator that contain a ``matches`` operator

Reviewer: Also specializers, no?

```python
f(x) if not g(x);
g(_: Specializer);
```

Author: Yes

Author: Added an example.

  within the negation

Some operations cannot be performed on **resources** in ``allow`` rules used with
the SQLAlchemy adaptor.  These operations can still be used on the actor or
action:

- application method calls

> - the ``matches`` operator with fields (``x matches Foo{a: 1}``).
> - rule specializers with fields (``allow(_, _, _: Foo{a: 1}) if ...;``)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

are then translated into filters on the SQLAlchemy query object.

For example, our above policy has the following code:

.. code-block:: polar

    allow(user: User, "read", post: Post) if
        post.access_level = "private" and post.created_by = user;

The oso library converts the constraints on Post expressed in this policy into a
SQLAlchemy query like::

    session.query(Post)
        .filter(Post.access_level == "private" & Post.created_by == user)

This translation makes the policy an effective abstraction for expressing
authorization logic over collections.

Limitations
===========

This feature is still under active development. Not all policies that work in a
non-partial setting will currently work with partials. More policies will be
supported as we continue working on this feature.  The SQLAlchemy adapter is
ready for evaluation and testing. However, we recommending getting in touch with
us before using it in production.  Join our Slack_.

There are some operators and features of Polar that do not currently work with
the SQLAlchemy Library when used **anywhere in the policy**:

- the ``cut`` operator
- rules that rely on ordered execution based on class inheritance

> - negated queries using the ``not`` operator that contain a ``matches`` operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- negated queries using the ``not`` operator that contain a ``matches`` operation
```

==================
SQLAlchemy Adapter
==================

> The ``sqlalchemy_oso`` library can enforce policies over SQLAlchemy models.

Reviewer: Should it be "The ``sqlalchemy-oso`` library" since that's what you pip install it as? Library vs. module distinction

> This allows policies to enforce access to collections of objects without

Reviewer: just to avoid repeating `enforce`
```suggestion
This allows policies to control access to collections of objects without
```

retrieving objects from the database.

.. _Session: https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/13/orm/session_api.html#sqlalchemy.orm.session.Session

Example
=======

Let's look at an example usage of this library.  Our example is a social media
app that allows users to create posts.  There is a ``Post`` model and a ``User``
model:

.. literalinclude:: /examples/list-filtering/sqlalchemy/sqlalchemy_example/models.py
    :caption: :fab:`python` models.py
    :language: python

Now, we'll write a policy over these models.  Our policy contains the following
rules:

1. A user can read any public post.
2. A user can read their own private posts.
3. A user can read private posts for users they manage (defined through the
   ``user.manages`` relationship).
4. A user can read all other users.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/list-filtering/sqlalchemy/sqlalchemy_example/policy.polar
    :caption: :fa:`oso` policy.polar
    :language: polar

.. note::

    The SQLAlchemy integration is deny by default.  The final rule for ``User``
    is needed to allow access to user objects for any user.

    If a query is made for a model that does not have an explicit rule in the

>     policy, no results will be returned.

Reviewer: As a follow-up it would be good to try to make this clearer. Especially the part that we're talking about sub-queries for authorization data (e.g., we're looking up `User` data as part of determining authorization for `Post`)

Author: agreed

> These rules are written over single model objects.

Reviewer: Can we expand on this? It feels like we're trying to make a bigger point here

Author: follow up
